==Locations for assigning roles==

Assigning roles is done for/in a particular context, such as "site" and "course."  While the process is similar for each context, the approach to role assignment may be different.   Here are several contexts and ways to find the Assign Roles page.

*System: _Site Administration > Users > Permissions > Assign system roles_
*Front page: _Site Administration > Front Page > Front Page roles_
*Course category: Assign Roles link in course categories page
*Course: Assign Roles link in course administration block
*Module: "Locally assigned roles" tab in editing activity page
*Block: Assign Roles link in course block (with editing turned on)
*User: Roles tab in user profile page

The Assign Roles page lists the names of users assigned to each role (unless there are more than 10 users, in which case this is stated).

==Contexts==

By assigning a role to a user in a certain context, you grant them the permissions contained in that role for the current context and all lower contexts.  The list of contexts in hierarchical order is as follows:

*System (no parent)
*Front page (parent = system)
*Course category (parent = system)
*Course (parent = category or system)
*Module (parent = course or system)
*Block (parent = course or system)
*User (parent = system)

Inheritance will kick in if a role is assigned at a higher level. For example, if a user is assigned a Teacher role in a particular course category then the user will have this role in all courses within the category.  Roles will only work if the role assignment is made in the correct context. For example, a Teacher role should be assigned in the course or course category context.

==Assigning a role==

"Student", "Teacher", and "Course Creator" are some of the predefined roles that come with VINL. The site administrator may have created additional roles.
To assign a role:
#Choose the type of role you wish to assign. For example, if we wanted to assign a Student role to Martin, we'd choose "Student" from the list of roles. 
#Once you have chosen a role, two lists appear: a list of users who currently have that role, and a list of users who don't. We can select Martin in the second list, and use the left-facing arrow button to add Martin to the list of Students. Multiple users may be selected by holding down the Ctrl key while clicking on the users' names.

Removing someone from a role is done by moving the user from the left column to the right.

==Hidden assignments==

To hide which role a user is assigned to, click the Hidden Assignments check box before assigning the role to the user. This feature is useful if (for example) you don't want everyone with teacher rights listed in the course description.  This feature is also very useful for hiding system-wide roles from everyone else on the site.

Note: The role assignment is not hidden from admins or teachers (users with the viewhiddenassigns capability).

==Multiple assignments==

A significant part of the roles infrastructure is the ability to assign a user into multiple roles at the same time. The capabilities of each role are merged to produce the effective set of capabilities. In particular, it is perfectly possible for a user to be both a Teacher and Student in the same course. You should be careful to ensure that if you change a user's role that you remove them from any other roles as required as this will not be done automatically.

==System roles==

Roles assigned in the system context are called system roles and apply across the entire site, including the front page. For example, a user assigned the system role of teacher will have this role in every course on the site.  In many sites only admins and course creators will be assigned system roles.

==Front page roles==

You can assign roles and set up role overrides for your front page in exactly the same way as for a course.  There are various ways of enabling logged-in users to participate in front page activities, depending on your VINL version. See the Roles FAQ for details.

==Assigning a role for a front page activity==

To assign a user a role for a front page activity:
# Assign the user a front page role, such as student, in _Administration > Front Page > Front Page roles_.
# Click the "Locally assigned roles" tab in editing activity page for the front page activity.
# Choose the type of role you wish to assign.
# Use the left-facing arrow button to add a particular user to the list of users with the role.

If a user is unassigned from a front page role AFTER being assigned a role for a front page activity, they remain assigned the role for the front page activity.