*Restore* allows you to reinstate a backup of a course to the present course.  Course backups are usually stored in the '''backupdata''' folder within the course files folder. There is a restore link next to every course backup.  

The backup and restore process is a common way of moving or, copying specific courses from one Moodle to another.

==Restoring a course==
To restore a course from a backup file:

  # Either upload a backup zip file to your course files area or click Restore in the Course administration block to access the backupdata folder.
  # Click the Restore link opposite the file you want to restore.
  # On the next page, click Yes to the question "Do you want to continue?" to start the restore process.
  # Click the Continue button at the bottom of the next page, listing details of the backup.
  # On the next page, select whether you want to restore to the existing course, adding data to it or deleting it first. If you have permission to restore to a new course, the restore page will contain additional options for setting the new course category, short name, full name, and start date.
  # Choose which activities you want to restore and whether to include user data.
  # Select course users if you are including user data.
  # Select appropriate role mappings. The options depend upon the roles you are allowed to assign. By default, teachers are only allowed to assign the roles of non-editing teacher, student, and guest.
  # Click the Continue button.
  # On the next page, click the "Restore this course now!" button.
  # On the next page, the progress of the restore is displayed with a report if it was successful. Click the Continue button.